The Sisters of the Common Life were women who made up one branch of the devotio moderna (Modern Devotion), a religious reform movement (c. 1380-1500s) involving both men and women and both clerical and lay members. The movement focused on the reform of Christian community and personal piety, and it spread out from the Low Countries and Northern Germany and influenced the shape of early modern piety. 

The traditionally regnant view paints the Sisters' piety (and that of the Modern Devout in general) as focused exclusively by intention on the ordinary, the moral, and the practical while eschewing the exceptional, the mystical, and the aspirational. The Modern Devotion has been characterized as pedestrian rather than aspirational,  restrictive rather than liberative, and realist rather than idealist.  These views still predominate, and they preclude a due appreciation of the mystical qualities present in the Sisters' texts.  Most scholarly work on the Sisters assumes that, as John van Engen writes of the Modern Devout generally, "they never came to focus on mystical union or extraordinary experience as the endpoint of their religious lives."  A similar perspective is repeated in the introduction to the 2025 English translation of the Master Geert's House Sister Book. There, G. H. Gerrits writes "the Modern Devotion was characterized by asceticism rather than by mysticism." 

However, the Sisters' own writings demonstrate that mystical aspirations and mystical praxes characterized their spirituality. In addition to one Rule of Life (Vivendi formula) written by one of their own, the Sisters composed Zusterboeken (Sister Books). As collections of viten (the Dutch version of the Latin vitae) written about, for, and by the Sisters themselves, the Sister Books offer historians the best resource for studying the spirituality of the Sisters on their own terms. Several Sister Books are extant in manuscript or, in one case, transcription. The Sisters' writings describe aspiration and pursuit of union with God, deiformity, and contemplation. In addition to these mystical heuristics, the Sisters' texts recount practices detachment, relational self-giving, inward turning, and the cultivation of integrity—all praxes for achieving mystical ends.

While my dissertation demonstrates the mystical quality of the Sisters' spirituality through a methodology of close reading, this present study explores the possibilities for complementing that work through computational text analysis. The aim is to investigate ways in which "distant reading" might augment a close reading approach not only by enhancing the exploration of the dissertation's central questions but also by contributing findings that could either bolster or challenge my original conclusions. In other words, applying digital analysis to my corpus might provide evidence that strengthens and further supports the argument of my dissertation—or that nuances and problematizes it by revealing surprising or contradictory patterns, networks, and trends in the themes within my sources. 

The small handful of extant medieval sources that constitutes the core of my primary research form a discrete yet robust data set for this computational analysis. However, while the texts are available in critical editions, none of them have heretofore been prepared for qualitative analysis.

This repository contains a demonstration of the process by which these texts were prepared as a coherent and useful corpus for digital analysis, such as text mining, topic modeling, and network visualization. 

Sources Cited

John Van Engen, _Devotio moderna: Basic Writings_, 30.

G. H. Gerrits, _Sisterbook of Master Geert’s House_, 42.
